Machine Learning


Tom M. Mitchell


**Product Details**

  - **Hardcover:** 432 pages ; Dimensions (in inches): 0.75 x 10.00 x 6.50


  - **Publisher:** McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math; (March 1, 1997)


  - **ISBN:** 0070428077


  - **Average Customer Review:** Based on 16 reviews.


  - **Amazon.com Sales Rank:** 42,816


  - **Popular in:** Redmond, WA (#17), Ithaca, NY (#9)


**Editorial Reviews**

_**From Book News, Inc.**_ An introductory text on primary approaches to machine learning and
the study of computer algorithms that improve automatically through experience. Introduce
basics concepts from statistics, artificial intelligence, information theory, and other disciplines as
need arises, with balanced coverage of theory and practice, and presents major algorithms with
illustrations of their use. Includes chapter exercises. Online data sets and implementations of
several algorithms are available on a Web site. No prior background in artificial intelligence or
statistics is assumed. For advanced undergraduates and graduate students in computer science,
engineering, statistics, and social sciences, as well as software professionals. _Book News, Inc.®,_
_Portland, OR_

_**Book Info:**_ Presents the key algorithms and theory that form the core of machine learning.
Discusses such theoretical issues as How does learning performance vary with the number of
training examples presented? and Which learning algorithms are most appropriate for various
types of learning tasks? DLC: Computer algorithms.

_**Book Description:**_ This book covers the field of machine learning, which is the study of
algorithms that allow computer programs to automatically improve through experience. The
book is intended to support upper level undergraduate and introductory level graduate courses in
machine learning


networks can be NP-hard (Dagum and Luby 1993). Fortunately, in practice approximate methods have been shown to be useful in many cases. Discussions of
inference methods for Bayesian networks are provided by Russell and Norvig
(1995) and by Jensen (1996).


**6.11.4** **Learning Bayesian Belief Networks**


Can we devise effective algorithms for learning Bayesian belief networks from
training data? This question is a focus of much current research. Several different
settings for this learning problem can be considered. First, the network structure
might be given in advance, or it might have to be inferred from the training data.

Second, all the network variables might be directly observable in each training
example, or some might be unobservable.

In the case where the network structure is given in advance and the variables
are fully observable in the training examples, learning the conditional probability
tables is straightforward. We simply estimate the conditional probability table
entries just as we would for a naive Bayes classifier.

In the case where the network structure is given but only some of the variable
values are observable in the training data, the learning problem is more difficult.
This problem is somewhat analogous to learning the weights for the hidden units in
an artificial neural network, where the input and output node values are given but
the hidden unit values are left unspecified by the training examples. In fact, Russell
et al. (1995) propose a similar gradient ascent procedure that learns the entries in
the conditional probability tables. This gradient ascent procedure searches through
a space of hypotheses that corresponds to the set of all possible entries for the
conditional probability tables. The objective function that is maximized during
gradient ascent is the probability P(D1h) of the observed training data D given
the hypothesis h. By definition, this corresponds to searching for the maximum
likelihood hypothesis for the table entries.


**6.11.5** **Gradient Ascent Training of** **Bayesian Networks**


The gradient ascent rule given by Russell et al. (1995) maximizes P(D1h) by
following the gradient of In P(D Ih) with respect to the parameters that define the
conditional probability tables of the Bayesian network. Let _**wi;k**_ denote a single
entry in one of the conditional probability tables. In particular, let _**wijk**_ denote
the conditional probability that the network variable _**Yi**_ will take on the value _**yi,**_
given that its immediate parents _**Ui**_ take on the values given by _**uik.**_ For example,
if _**wijk**_ is the top right entry in the conditional probability table in Figure 6.3, then

_**Yi**_ is the variable _**Campjire, Ui**_ is the tuple of its parents _**(Stomz, BusTourGroup),**_
_**yij**_ = _**True,**_ and _**uik**_ = _**(False, False).**_ The gradient of In P(D1h) is given by
the derivatives for each of the _**toijk.**_ As we show below, each of these
derivatives can be calculated as


Applying Bayes theorem to rewrite _**Ph (dlyij, uik),**_ we have


Thus, we have derived the gradient given in Equation (6.25). There is one more
item that must be considered before we can state the gradient ascent training
procedure. In particular, we require that as the weights _**wijk**_ are updated they
must remain valid probabilities in the interval [0,1]. We also require that the
sum _**wijk**_ remains 1 for all _**i,**_ k. These constraints can be satisfied by updating
_**xj**_
weights in a two-step process. First we update each _**wijk**_ by gradient ascent


where _**q**_ is a small constant called the learning rate. Second, we renormalize
the weights _**wijk**_ to assure that the above constraints are satisfied. As discussed
by Russell et al., this process will converge to a locally maximum likelihood
hypothesis for the conditional probabilities in the Bayesian network.

As in other gradient-based approaches, this algorithm is guaranteed only to
find some local optimum solution. An alternative to gradient ascent is the EM
algorithm discussed in Section 6.12, which also finds locally maximum likelihood
solutions.


**6.11.6 Learning the Structure of Bayesian Networks**


Learning Bayesian networks when the network structure is not known in advance
is also difficult. Cooper and Herskovits (1992) present a Bayesian scoring metric
for choosing among alternative networks. They also present a heuristic search
algorithm called **K2** for learning network structure when the data is fully observable. Like most algorithms for learning the structure of Bayesian networks, K2
performs a greedy search that trades off network complexity for accuracy over the
training data. In one experiment **K2** was given a set of 3,000 training examples
generated at random from a manually constructed Bayesian network containing
37 nodes and 46 arcs. This particular network described potential anesthesia problems in a hospital operating room. In addition to the data, the program was also
given an initial ordering over the 37 variables that was consistent with the partial


**6.12.2** **General Statement of EM Algorithm**


Above we described an EM algorithm for the problem of estimating means of a
mixture of Normal distributions. More generally, the EM algorithm can be applied
in many settings where we wish to estimate some set of parameters 8 that describe
an underlying probability distribution, given only the observed portion of the full
data produced by this distribution. In the above two-means example the parameters
of interest were 8 = _**(PI, p2),**_ and the full data were the triples _**(xi, zil, zi2)**_ of
which only the _**xi**_ were observed. In general let X = _**{xl,**_ . . ., _**x,}**_ denote the
observed data in a set of m independently drawn instances, let Z = _**{zl,**_ . . ., _**z,}**_
denote the unobserved data in these same instances, and let _**Y**_ = X U Z denote
the full data. Note the unobserved Z can be treated as a random variable whose
probability distribution depends on the unknown parameters 8 and on the observed
data X. Similarly, _**Y**_ is a random variable because it is defined in terms of the
random variable Z. In the remainder of this section we describe the general form
of the EM algorithm. We use _**h**_ to denote the current hypothesized values of the
parameters 8, and _**h'**_ to denote the revised hypothesis that is estimated on each
iteration of the EM algorithm.

The EM algorithm searches for the maximum likelihood hypothesis _**h'**_ by
seeking the _**h'**_ that maximizes E[ln _**P(Y (h')].**_ This expected value is taken over
the probability distribution governing _**Y,**_ which is determined by the unknown
parameters 8. Let us consider exactly what this expression signifies. First, _**P(Ylhl)**_
is the likelihood of the full data _**Y**_ given hypothesis _**h'.**_ It is reasonable that we wish
to find a _**h'**_ that maximizes some function of this quantity. Second, maximizing
the logarithm of this quantity In _**P(Ylhl)**_ also maximizes _**P(Ylhl),**_ as we have
discussed on several occasions already. Third, we introduce the expected value

E[ln _**P(Ylhl)]**_ because the full data _**Y**_ is itself a random variable. Given that
the full data _**Y**_ is a combination of the observed data X and unobserved data

Z, we must average over the possible values of the unobserved Z, weighting
each according to its probability. In other words we take the expected value

E[ln _**P(Y lh')]**_ over the probability distribution governing the random variable _**Y .**_
The distribution governing _**Y**_ is determined by the completely known values for

X, plus the distribution governing Z.

What is the probability distribution governing _**Y ?**_ In general we will not
know this distribution because it is determined by the parameters **0** that we are
trying to estimate. Therefore, the EM algorithm uses its current hypothesis _**h**_ in
place of the actual parameters 8 to estimate the distribution governing _**Y .**_ Let us
define a function _**Q(hllh)**_ that gives E[ln _**P(Y lh')]**_ as a function of _**h',**_ under the
assumption that _8_ = _**h**_ and given the observed portion X of the full data _**Y .**_


We write this function _**Q**_ in the form _**Q(hllh)**_ to indicate that it is defined in part
by the assumption that the current hypothesis _**h**_ is equal to 8. In its general form,
the EM algorithm repeats the following two steps until convergence:


_**ai**_ denotes the _**if***_ prediction algorithm in the pool A of algorithms. _**wi**_ denotes the weight associated
with _**ai.**_


For all _**i**_ initialize _**wi c**_ 1
For each training example _**(x, c(x))**_
_**c**_ Initialize _**qo**_ and _**ql**_ to **0**

_**am**_ For each prediction algorithm _**ai**_

_**c**_ If _**ai(x) = O**_ then _**qo**_ **t** _**q0**_ _**+wi**_
_**If ai(x)**_ = _**1**_ then _**ql**_ _**c ql**_ + _**wi**_
If _**ql**_            - _**qo**_ then predict _**c(x)**_ = 1
If _**qo**_            - _**q1**_ then predict _**c(x)**_ = **0**
If _**ql**_ = _**qo**_ then predict **0** or 1 at random for _**c(x)**_
For each prediction algorithm _**ai**_ in A do

If _**ai(x)**_ # _**c(x)**_ then _**wi**_ +- _**Buri**_


TABLE 7.1
WEIGHTED-MAJORITY algorithm.


algorithm will ever be eliminated completely. If an algorithm misclassifies a training example, it will simply receive a smaller vote in the future.

We now show that the number of mistakes committed by the WEIGHTEDMAJORITY algorithm can be bounded in terms of the number of mistakes made by
the best prediction algorithm in the voting pool.


**Theorem 7.5.** **Relative mistake bound for WEIGHTED-MAJORITY.** Let **D** be any
sequence of training examples, let A be any set of _**n**_ prediction algorithms, and let
k be the minimum number of mistakes made by any algorithm in A for the training

sequence _**D.**_ Then the number of mistakes over D made by the WEIGHTED-MAJORITY
algorithm using /3 = 4 is at most

**2.4(k** + log, _**n)**_


Proof. We prove the theorem by comparing the final weight of the best prediction

algorithm to the sum of weights over all algorithms. Let _**aj**_ denote an algorithm from
A that commits the optimal number k of mistakes. The final weight _**wj**_ associated
with _**aj**_ will be because its initial weight is 1 and it is multiplied by 3 for each
mistake. Now consider the sum W = _**x : =, w i**_ of the weights associated with all _**n**_
algorithms in A. W is initially n. For each mistake made by WEIGHTED-MAJORITY,

W is reduced to at most _:w._ This is the case because the algorithms voting in the
weighted majority must hold at least half of the total weight _W,_ and this portion
of W will be reduced by a factor of 4. Let _**M**_ denote the total number of mistakes
committed by WEIGHTED-MAJORITY for the training sequence D. Then the final total
weight W is at most _**n(:lM.**_ Because the final weight _**wj**_ cannot be greater than the
final total weight, we have


